OUTLINE OF A NATURAL SYSTEM OF MEDICAL SCIENCE.




                                  OUTLINE
                                   OF A
                              NATURAL SYSTEM
                                    OF
                             MEDICAL SCIENCE.

                  FORMING THE PRELIMINARY LECTURES TO TWO
                  COURSES: ONE ON ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY;
                      THE OTHER ON PATHOLOGY AND THE
                           PRACTICE OF MEDICINE.

                         BY ALEXANDER WALKER, ESQ.
                       LECTURER ON PHYSIOLOGY, ETC.
               EDITOR OF THE ARCHIVES OF UNIVERSAL SCIENCE,
                                  &c. &c.

    _By pronouncing diseases incurable, physicians have attempted
    to enact a law of neglect, and to exempt ignorance from
    discredit_.

                                                         LORD BACON.

                                EDINBURGH:
                     PRINTED AT THE UNIVERSITY PRESS.
              FOR SIR RICHARD PHILLIPS, NO. 6, BRIDGE-STREET,
                         BLACKFRIARS, LONDON, AND
                 MESSRS T. BRYCE AND CO. INFIRMARY-STREET,
                                EDINBURGH.
                                   1808.




TO

ALEXANDER MONRO, ESQ. SENIOR,

_M. D. Professor of Medicine, Anatomy and Surgery, in the University of
Edinburgh, &c._


This Outline of a Natural System of Medical Science is most respectfully
dedicated by one who is grateful for the benefits he has conferred upon
Anatomy and Physiology, and who is desirous of following his footsteps in
the cultivation of these Sciences.

                                                         ALEXANDER WALKER.

    _2, North College Street,
        27th October 1808._




ADVERTISEMENT.


_In this small Work, the Author has delivered a very brief Outline of
a Natural Systematic Arrangement and Theory of Anatomy, Physiology,
Pathology and of the Materia Medica, as strictly dependent on each other._

_Of this system the tendency is, not to controvert one established fact
of Medical Science, but by pointing out their relations, to simplify, to
consolidate and if possible to increase the amount of our knowledge in
all the departments of Medicine._

_As a work of this kind is a fair object of criticism; to the philosophic
and liberal reviewer I have only to say, that I shall most willingly
submit to his decision. Error is almost inseparable from propositions of
any extent or magnitude, and I have doubtless committed many. But to the
reviewers for the Edinburgh Medical and Surgical Journal, and those of a
London Review under their influence, as they constitute a party somewhat
in opposition to my views, I have to observe, that, should they act
unjustly, as I know them not individually, I must hold their editor, whom
I do know, responsible for their conduct, and I consequently shall do so._




PRELIMINARY LECTURE TO THE COURSE OF ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY; EXHIBITING
THE OUTLINE OF A NATURAL SYSTEM OF THESE SCIENCES.


GENTLEMEN,

The functions of man are the most interesting objects of Science. Physics
and Morals are equally involved by them. It is in them that the physical
sciences terminate, and that the moral sciences have their origin.

Of what avail are the former, but to develope the influence of external
bodies upon the functions of man? What are the latter, but the results of
the reaction of that influence upon men in society?

To explain them is the business of physiology; and if it have hitherto
failed in doing so—if it have even neglected the noblest of all the
functions—I should say the noblest branch of philosophy—the intellectual
functions of man, and have abandoned them to persons totally incapable of
developing them, because totally ignorant of the structure on which they
depend, and who have left them in a state of greater obscurity than that
in which they found them, that is the fault of physiologists, and not of
their science.

In these lectures, I shall at least be influenced by the deepest sense of
such errors.

But it is not merely the philosophy of the human mind, or rather of
the intellectual functions of man, that have thus been abandoned to
barbarism. The science itself has never been systematized; and all its
individual parts have been so neglected, that the other sciences and the
arts dependent upon it, have been left in similar obscurity.

I shall endeavour to shew that it is by the aid of physiology alone that,
in explaining the functions of the eye, for instance, we can render
perfect the theories of colour and of vision; that, in explaining the
functions of the ear, we can construct rational ones of phonics and of
hearing; that in explaining the functions of the organ of voice, we
can illustrate the formation of letters, and the origin of languages;
that, in explaining the functions of the muscles, we can establish those
first principles of taste in the fine arts, the very existence of which
have so often been questioned, and so deliver a theory of movement and
of attitude, applicable to sculpture, the higher species of painting,
gesture in oratory, &c. In fine, it is by physiological means only,
that we can construct a natural theory of medicine, and render precise
and easy, the most delicate and the most difficult of the operations of
surgery.

To effect these purposes, nothing is more necessary than arrangement,
because it at once involves facts and their theory, or the reasonings
founded upon them.

       *       *       *       *       *

In considering a natural arrangement of Anatomy and Physiology, it
appears to me an unquestionable point, that it ought to indicate, at a
single glance, the relation of all the functions to and their dependence
upon each other.

It is upon this principle that I have constructed the natural arrangement
which I am about to detail; and a single remark upon the arrangements
adopted by the most celebrated modern physiologists, will, at once, shew
the originality of the plan which I propose, and point out the errors of
arrangement which I deprecate.

Blumenbach, Chausier, Dumas and Bichat, treat of circulation before
absorption, on which it depends, and even before mastication, deglutition
and digestion, on which, in general, even absorption itself chiefly
depends.

If the arrangement of Chausier in particular, who, in this respect, is as
accurate as any of them, were to be considered as indicating the relation
and dependence of the functions, so absurd is it, that absorption instead
of the cause, would be the result of nutrition, generation the result of
absorption, and digestion the result of generation. Thus, by arranging
effects in the place of causes, they confound the relations of the
functions, and reverse the very order of their dependence.

The division of the functions into external and internal, as anciently
proposed by Aristotle, and afterwards successively adopted and improved
by Buffon, Grimaud and Bichat (the last of whom substituted for them the
terms organic and animal) is still more faulty.

Anatomy, I divide into three parts, namely that which considers the
mechanical or loco-motive organs, that which considers the vital organs,
and that which considers the intellectual organs.

Under the mechanical or loco-motive organs, I class, first, the bones
which support the rest of the animal structure; second, the ligaments
which unite them; and third, the muscles which move them.

Under the vital organs, I class, first, the organs of digestion, the
absorbent surfaces, and the vessels which absorb from these surfaces;
second, the heart, lungs and blood-vessels, which derive their contents
(the blood) from the absorbed lymph; and third, the organs of secretion,
which separate various matters from the blood. Then follow the generative
organs, which, though generally formed into a distinct class from the
vital, ought not by any means to be so reckoned. For it is evident, that
they form, as it were, the sequel of the vital organs, being dependent
on secretion—the last of the vital functions, and destined merely to
propagate vitality, and to communicate it to a new series of beings.

Under the intellectual organs, I class, first, the organs of sense, where
impressions take place; second, the brain or organ of judgment, where
these excite ideas; and third, the nerves, where volition results from
the last.